.\"
.\"     ad -- ASCII dump
.\"     ad.1: manual page
.\"
.\"     Copyright (C) 1996-2025  Paul J. Lucas
.\"
.\"     This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\"     it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\"     the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
.\"     (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\"     This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\"     but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\"     MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\"     GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\"     You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\"     along with this program.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.TH \f3ad\f1 1 "July 9, 2025" "PJL TOOLS"
.SH NAME
ad \- ASCII dump
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ad
.RI [ options ]
[\f3+\f2offset\f1]
.RI [ infile
.RI [ outfile ]]
.br
.B ad
.B \-\-reverse
.RI [ \-dox ]
.RI [ infile
.RI [ outfile ]]
.br
.B ad
.B \-\-version
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ad
dumps a file
as rows of 16 bytes
(by default)
in both hexadecimal
and also ASCII or UTF-8
(for those bytes for which
.BR isprint (3)
returns true)
to standard output.
For those bytes that are not printable,
prints `\f(CW.\f1' (dot) instead.
.PP
.B ad
is similar to
.BR hexdump (1),
.BR od (1),
and
.BR xxd (1)
except that
.B ad
can also search for and highlight matching strings or numbers
similar to
.BR grep (1).
Like
.BR xxd (1),
.B ad
can also patch binary files.
.SS Input & Output
By default,
.B ad
reads from standard input and writes to standard output.
Alternatively,
file names for either or both may be specified.
A file name of ``\-''
may be used for either
and means standard input or standard output,
depending.
.SH OPTIONS
An option argument
.I f
means
.IR file ,
.I n
means
.IR "unsigned integer" ,
and
.I s
means
.IR string .
If
.I n
starts with either
.B 0x
or
.BR 0X ,
then
.I n
is interpreted as hexedecimal.
.TP 7
\f3+\f2n\f1[\f2u\f1]
Skips reading
.I n
bytes of data before dumping.
If specified, the unit
.I u
may be one of
.B b
(512-byte blocks),
.B k
(kilobytes),
or
.B m
(megabytes),
and
.I n
is interpreted accordingly.
.TP
.BI \-\-big-endian \f1=\fPn "\f1 | \fP" "" \-E " n"
Highlights all occurrences of the unsigned integer
.I n
in big-endian byte order.
.IP
The number of bytes to search for is automatically calculated
as the minimum number of bytes needed to represent
.IR n .
For example,
if
.I n
were in the range 0\-255,
the number of bytes would be 1;
if
.I n
were in the range 256\-65535,
the number of bytes would be 2;
and so on.
This can be overridden by one of the
.BR \-\-bits ,
.BR \-b ,
.BR \-\-bytes ,
or
.B \-B
options.
.TP
.BI \-\-bits \f1=\fPn "\f1 | \fP" "" \-b " n"
Sets the search number size to
.I n
bits
(and therefore the number of bytes is set to
.I n
divided by 8).
Must be one of 8, 16, 24, 32, 40, 48, 56, or 64.
The default is automatically calculated
based on the argument to one of the
.BR \-\-little-endian ,
.BR \-e ,
.BR \-\-big-endian ,
.BR \-E ,
.BR \-\-host-endian ,
or
.B \-H
options.
.TP
.BI \-\-bytes \f1=\fPn "\f1 | \fP" "" \-B " n"
Same as the
.B \-\-bits
or
.B \-b
options
but in
.I n
bytes.
Must be in 1\-8.
.TP
.BI \-\-c-array \f1[=\fPs "]\f1 | \fP" "" \-C "\f1[s]"
Dumps bytes as C array and length variable definitions.
The variable names are derived from the input file name, if any,
or "\f(CWstdin\f1" otherwise.
If given,
the format
.I s
is one or more of the following letters
that specify the format of the declarations:
.RS 7
.TP 3
.B 8
Declares the array as \f(CWchar8_t\f1.
The default is \f(CWunsigned char\fP.
.TP
.B c
Declares both the array and length as \f(CWconst\f1.
.TP
.B i
Declares the length as \f(CWint\f1.
May be combined with
.B l
or
.BR u .
.TP
.B l
Declares the length as \f(CWlong\f1.
May be combined with
.B i
or
.BR u .
.TP
.B s
Declares both the array and length as \f(CWstatic\f1.
.TP
.B t
Declares the length as \f(CWsize_t\f1.
.TP
.B u
Declares the length as \f(CWunsigned\f1.
May be combined with
.B i
or
.BR l .
.RE
.IP
If none of
.BR i ,
.BR l ,
.BR t ,
or
.B u
is specified,
then the array length is not dumped.
Note that there must not be whitespace separating
.B \-C
from its argument,
if given.
.TP
.BI \-\-color \f1=\fPs "\f1 | \fP" "" \-c " s"
Sets when to colorize output to
.I s
(which is case-insensitive).
(See the
.B AD_COLORS
environment variable about colorization.)
The choices for
.I s
are:
.RS
.TP 11
.B always
Always colorize.
.TP
.B auto
Same as
.B isatty
(for compatibility with
.BR grep ).
.TP
.B isatty
Colorize only when standard output is connected to a TTY
(terminal)
and the TERM environment variable
is not empty and not equal to
.BR dumb .
(This is equivalent to
.BR grep 's
.B \-\-color=auto
option,
but explicit about what ``auto'' means.)
.TP
.B never
Never colorize.
Note that this greatly diminishes the usefulness of the
.BR \-\-little-endian ,
.BR \-e ,
.BR \-\-big-endian ,
.BR \-E ,
.BR \-\-host-endian ,
.BR \-H ,
.BR \-\-string ,
.BR \-s ,
.BR \-\-strings ,
and
.B \-n
options since matches won't be highlighted.
(However,
the
.B \-\-matching-only
or
.B \-m
options
can be used to dump only rows having matches.)
.TP
.B not_file
Colorize only when
.I not
writing to a regular file
(hence writing to a TTY or pipe)
and the TERM environment variable
is not empty and not equal to
.BR dumb .
(Specifically,
.BR fstat (2)
is called on standard output:
colorize only if \f(CWS_IFREG\f1 is false.)
.IP
This is more useful than
.B isatty
since it accomodates the common case of allowing color output to be piped to
.BR less (1)
and still display in color since
.B less
understands
.I SGR
(``Select Graphic Rendition'')
ASCII terminal escape sequences
that produce color.
.TP
.B not_isreg
An explicit synonym for
.BR not_file .
.TP
.B tty
A shorthand synonym for
.BR isatty .
.RE
.IP
The default is
.BR not_file .
.TP
.BR \-\-decimal " | " \-d
Prints offsets in decimal.
For
.BR \-\-reverse ,
.BR \-\-revert ,
or
.BR \-r ,
parses offsets in decimal.
.TP
.BI \-\-group-by \f1=\fPn "\f1 | \fP" "" \-g " n"
Dumps bytes grouped by
.I n
bytes.
Must be one of 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, or 32.
The default is 2.
When less than 8,
an additional space is dumped after the 8th byte
to aid readability.
.TP
.BR \-\-help " | " \-h
Prints a help message
to standard error
and exits.
.TP
.BR \-\-hexadecimal " | " \-x
Prints offsets in hexadecimal
(the default).
For
.BR \-\-reverse ,
.BR \-\-revert ,
or
.BR \-r ,
parses offsets in hexadecimal
(also the default).
.TP
.BI \-\-host-endian \f1=\fPn "\f1 | \fP" "" \-H " n"
Same as the
.B \-\-big-endian
or
.B \-E
options
but in host-endian byte order.
.TP
.BR \-\-ignore-case " | " \-i
Performs a case-insensitive search
of the string specified by the
.B \-\-string
or
.B \-s
options.
.TP
.BI \-\-little-endian \f1=\fPn "\f1 | \fP" "" \-e " n"
Same as the
.B \-\-big-endian
or
.B \-E
options
but in little-endian byte order.
.TP
.BR \-\-matching-only " | " \-m
Only dumps rows having matches.
.TP
.BI \-\-max-bytes \f1=\fPn "\f1 | \fP" "" \-N " n"
Reads at most
.I n
bytes.
.TP
.BI \-\-max-lines \f1=\fPn "\f1 | \fP" "" \-L " n"
Reads at most
.I n
lines.
.TP
.BR \-\-no-ascii " | " \-A
Suppresses printing the ASCII part.
.TP
.BR \-\-no-offsets " | " \-O
Suppresses printing offsets.
.TP
.BR \-\-octal " | " \-o
Prints offsets in octal.
For
.BR \-\-reverse ,
.BR \-\-revert ,
or
.BR \-r ,
parses offsets in octal.
.TP
.BR \-\-plain " | " \-P
Dumps in plain format;
same as:
.BR \-AOg32 .
.TP
.BR \-\-printing-only " | " \-p
Only dumps rows having printable characters.
.TP
.BR \-\-resource-fork " | " \-R
On macOS only,
dumps a file's resource fork,
if any.
.TP
.BR \-\-reverse " | " \-\-revert " | " \-r
Reverse dumps a previous dump from
.B ad
into a binary file.
This allows a binary file to be dumped,
edited using a text editor,
and reverse dumped back into a binary file.
(The
.B \-\-revert
spelling is for compatibility with
.BR xxd (1).)
Note that only the hexedecimal part of the dump is read;
the ASCII part is ignored.
.IP
When an existing output file is used,
it is not truncated.
This allows a small dump file
to patch a subset of bytes in an existing larger binary file.
The bytes to be patched are given by the offsets.
.IP
Elided bytes,
given by the separator of ``\f(CW-\fP'' characters
when none of the
.BR \-\-matching-only ,
.BR \-m ,
.BR \-\-printing-only ,
.BR \-p ,
.BR \-\-verbose ,
or
.B \-V
options are used,
are expanded by copying the preceding row
as many times as necessary.
.TP
\f3\-\-skip-bytes\f1=\f2n\f1[\f2u\f1] | \f3\-j\f1 \f2n\f1[\f2u\f1]
Same as the
.B +
option.
(If both options are specified,
their values are added.)
.TP
.BI \-\-string \f1=\fPs "\f1 | \fP" "" \-s " s"
Searches for the string
.I s
and highlights matches.
.TP
.BI \-\-strings \f1[\fP "=" n \f1]\fP " \f1|\fP " \-n\f1[\fP n \f1]\fP
Searches for all ASCII strings
of at least length
.I n
like
.BR strings (1)
and highlights matches.
If dumping in UTF-8,
searches for all UTF-8 strings
of at least length
.I n
characters
(not bytes).
The default for
.I n
is 4.
.TP
.BR \-\-strings-opts \f1=\fPs "\f1 | \fP" "" \-S " s"
Specifies options for
.B \-\-strings
matching.
Valid values for
.I s
are:
.RS 7
.TP 3
.PD 0
.B 0
Strings must end in a null byte.
.TP
.B f
Strings may contain form-feed characters.
.TP
.B l
Strings may contain line-feed characters.
.TP
.B n
Synonym for
.B l
(newline).
.TP
.B r
Strings may contain carriage return characters.
.TP
.B s
Strings may contain space characters.
.TP
.B t
Strings may contain tab characters.
.TP
.B v
Strings may contain vertical tab characters.
.TP
.B w
Strings may contain any whitespace characters.
Same as
.BR flrstv .
.RE
.PD
.IP
Multiple options may be given,
one immediately after the other.
Alternatively,
\f(CW*\fP may be given to mean ``all''
or
\f(CW-\fP may be given to mean ``none.''
The default is
.BR 0lst .
.IP
Specifying
.B \-\-strings-opts
implies
.BR \-\-strings .
.TP
.BR \-\-total-matches " | " \-t
Additionally prints the total number of matches
to standard error.
.TP
.BR \-\-total-matches-only " | " \-T
Only prints the total number of matches
to standard error.
.TP
.BI \-\-utf8 \f1=\fPs "\f1 | \fP" "" \-u " s"
Sets when to dump in UTF-8 rather than ASCII to
.I s
(which is case-insensitive).
The choices for
.I s
are:
.RS 7
.TP 8
.B always
Always dump in UTF-8.
.TP
.B auto
Dump in UTF-8 only if the terminal's encoding is UTF-8.
.TP
.B never
Never dump in UTF-8.
.RE
.IP
The default is
.BR never .
(Either
.B always
or
.B auto
should be used
only if UTF-8 encoded text is expected.)
.IP
Because mutli-byte UTF-8 encoded characters
are displayed as a single character,
one to five padding characters
(given by either the
.B \-\-utf8-padding
or
.B \-U
options)
are printed to make up the difference.
.TP
.BR \-\-utf8-padding \f1=\fPn "\f1 | \fP" "" \-U " n"
Sets the UTF-8 padding character to
.I n
where
.I n
is its Unicode code-point.
As additional special cases,
the code-point can also be specified
as either a single character
or either a \f(CWU+\fP or \f(CWu+\fP
followed by a hexedecimal integer.
The default is the ``white square'' U+25A1.
.TP
.BR \-\-verbose " | " \-V
Be verbose by dumping all bytes of data.
Ordinarily,
rows of bytes that match
the previous row
are elided
so as not to dump
possibly many rows of repeated data.
Instead,
a separator of ``\f(CW-\f1'' characters is printed
along with the number of bytes elided
in both decimal and hexadecimal.
.IP
However,
if none of the
.BR \-\-matching-only ,
.BR \-m ,
.BR \-\-printing-only ,
nor
.B \-p
options are given,
then the last row of data is dumped
even if it matches the previous row
to indicate the end of the file.
.TP
.BR \-\-version " | " \-v
Prints the version number to standard error
and exits.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.PD 0
.IP 0
Success.
.IP 1
No matches if one of
.BR \-\-little-endian ,
.BR \-e ,
.BR \-\-big-endian ,
.BR \-E ,
.BR \-\-host-endian ,
.BR \-H ,
.BR \-\-string ,
.BR \-s ,
.BR \-\-strings ,
.BR \-n ,
.BR \-\-strings-opts ,
or
.B \-S
was specified.
.IP 64
Command-line usage error.
.IP 65
Invalid dump format for
.BR \-\-reverse ,
.BR \-\-revert ,
or
.B \-r
options.
.IP 66
Open file error.
.IP 71
System error.
.IP 73
Create file error.
.IP 74
I/O error.
.PD
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP 4
.B AD_COLORS
This variable specifies the colors and other attributes
used to highlight various parts of the output
in a manner similar to the
.B GREP_COLORS
variable
used by
.BR grep .
.IP
As with
.BR grep ,
the value is composed of a colon-separated sequence of capabilities.
Each capability is of the form
.IR name [= SGR ]
where
.I name
is a two-character capability name
and
.IR SGR ,
if present,
is a
``Select Graphic Rendition''
value
that is a semicolon-separated list of integers
in the range 0\-255.
An example SGR value is \f(CW31;1\f1
that specifies a bright red foreground
on the terminal's default background.
.IP
Capability names in upper-case are unique to
.BR ad ;
those in lower-case are upwards compatibile with
.BR grep .
.RS
.TP 10
.BI bn= SGR
SGR for the byte offset
(as with
.BR grep ).
The default is \f(CW36\f1
(green foreground over current terminal background).
.TP
.BI EC= SGR
SGR for elided rows and byte counts.
The default is \f(CW35\f1
(magenta foreground over current terminal background).
.TP
.BI MA= SGR
SGR for matched ASCII characters.
The default is \f(CW41;1\f1
(current terminal foreground over a bright red background).
.TP
.BI MH= SGR
SGR for matched hexadecimal.
The default is \f(CW41;1\f1
(current terminal foreground over a bright red background).
.TP
.BI MB= SGR
SGR for both matched ASCII and hexadecimal.
(This capability is the same as specifying both the
.B MA
and
.B MH
capabilities
with the same
.IR SGR ).
.TP
.BI mt= SGR
Same as
.B MB
(for compatibility with
.BR grep ).
.TP
.B ne
Boolean value that,
when true,
prevents clearing to the end of a line using the Erase in Line
(EL)
SGR escape sequence
(as with
.BR grep ).
.IP
This is needed on terminals on which EL is not supported.
It is otherwise useful on terminals for which the
.B back_color_erase
(BCE)
Boolean terminfo capability does not apply,
when the chosen highlight colors do not affect the background,
or when EL is too slow or causes too much flicker.
The default is false
(i.e., EL is used for clearing to the end of a line).
.TP
.BI se= SGR
SGR for the ``\f(CW:\f1'' and ``\f(CW-\f1'' separators
(as with
.BR grep ).
The default is \f(CW36\f1
(cyan foreground over current terminal background).
.RE
.IP
The term ``color'' is used loosely.
In addition to colors,
other character attributes
such as bold, underlined, reverse video, etc.,
may be possible depending on the capabilities of the terminal.
.TP
.B TERM
The type of the terminal on which
.B ad
is being run.
.SH AUTHOR
Paul J. Lucas
.RI < paul@lucasmail.org >
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR grep (1),
.BR hexdump (1),
.BR od (1),
.BR less (1),
.BR strings (1),
.BR xxd (1),
.BR fstat (2),
.BR isatty (3),
.BR isprint (3),
.BR sysexits (3)
.PP
.nf
.IR "ANSI escape code" ,
.RI < https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ANSI_escape_code >
.\" vim:set et sw=2 ts=2:
